The Mughal emperor Akbar loved to tell his experiences and successes as a ruler and to have them known far and wide.
He commissioned his good friend and confidant Abu-l-Fazl to record and illustrate the happenings of his life.
One of Akbar’s favourite things to do was hunt.
This scene, which was illustrated for Akbar by Basawan and Tara the Elder, takes place in the Narwar District in Gwalior, India.
Akbar and his party were making their way though Narwar, hunting as they went.
Suddenly, a ferocious mother tiger and her cubs jumped out of the bushes and attacked him and his party.
Everyone froze in fear and surprise.
Everyone except Akbar!
Leaping courageously forward, Akbar faced the fearsome tiger and slew her with one stroke of his sword.
Galvanized into action by their emperor’s brave deed,
the rest of Akbar’s fighting men leaped forward to take on the tiger’s cubs, slaying every last one.
By his brave actions, Akbar saved the rest of his party from an almost certain death.
This great display of swordsmanship illustrates to anyone who reads the passage and sees this painting
how Akbar takes care of and protects his people.
The people of his empire would see this from far an wide and trust him as their ruler.
The hunt is used as a metaphor for his strength and ability to overcome his enemies
no matter how strong or terrifying they may be.
For just as he bravely faces danger and risks his life to protect the people travelling with him,
so, too, does Akbar risk his life for the wellbeing of his empire and its citizens.
And just as he and his men fight and kill a tiger and her cubs,
so, too, does he courageously lead his men into battles and defeat his enemies.
What people wouldn’t want this man as their leader?
This illustration of Akbar’s might also maintains his divine right as ruler of the Mughal Empire to its citizens.
This solidifies his claim to the throne and increases his peoples’ loyalty towards him.
Think of the awe experienced by those who witnessed this event and the stories they would tell their friends.
No one but a man with “the strength of the lion of God in his arms
and the coat of mail of the Divine protection on his breast”, could have beheaded
such a fearsome monster with just one stroke of his sword and lived with not a single scratch on him.
This poor man certainly couldn’t.
It seems clear then, that Akbar commissioned this book and its accompanying illustrations partly as a sort of propaganda,
a way to impress his people and ensure the loyalty of those around him.
Illustrations like this one and the descriptions that accompany them show Akbar’s courage in the face of danger,
his power and might in the midst of battle, and his selflessness and protectiveness of his people.
All of these qualities are seen and heard by his citizens
and lead them to trust in his leadership and skill and to be happy with him as their emperor.